1a
--

Healthcare is a regulated industry.  This means that there are additional requirements, and possibly certifications and audits that need to fit into the schedule.

The bid and staffing are fixed for this project, which means the earlier it is done, the better.  This implies that risky items should be front-loaded so as to get maximum opportunity to adjust for the unexpected.  Also, the given staff is rather light on testers, which might be a challenge.

This project also integrates with a legacy database, to which our team will have limited access.  The interoperation with this equipment is both a major requirement and a feedback bottleneck, so this will have to be prioritized properly.

As far as core compentencies, I'd choose these to be the most important:

Managing requirements
Scheduling
Managing risks
Interaction and communication
Teambuilding

The contract states that we should be at CMM level 2 whether we're certified as such or not.  This implies the following set of core processes:

Requirements management
Project planning
Project monitoring and control
Supplier agreement management
Measurement and analysis
Process adn product quality assurance
Configuration management


1b
--

The initial team seems fine for now, but it's probably about time to start staffing up.  I wouldn't replace any of the existing staff, but immediately bring in more requirements analysts.

For the project architect position I'd try to bring along the most experienced person from my last team, unless someone with more domain knowledge were available.  

For the development team I'd want to change the plan a bit: 3 teams of 5 developers, with one Columbia engineer on each team, all of which report to the SDM.  If they are available, I'd bring some of the 4-years-of-experience people from my last group to lead the teams, though probably not too many - I don't want an old boys' club to form. I'd want to bring in one of these teams immediately to start familiarizing themselves with the legacy system we'll be integrating with.

The staffing plan didn't include any test personnel, which makes me wonder if the last manager was planning on having the development team do all the testing.  Generally a bad idea, especially since we now want to productize the system we're making.  I'd want a QA manager with at least 5 testers, ideally an already-jelled test team.

JDI has limited domain knowledge, so I'd look to hire or contract the already-planned-for two specialists.  Again, since we're looking to productize this system, a permanent hire would be preferable.  These people could be lured from contracting firms that specialize in healthcare, or from the healthcare industry itself.

The most difficult positions to fill are the specialists and the architect, since domain knowledge is critical for those roles.